Welcome to Anaesthesia Compendium. Today's viva station: thermoregulation.
I shall take the candidate through it, question by question. Let us begin.
Let us discuss thermoregulation. Outline the importance of body temperature and how
heat balance is determined.
The regulation of body temperature is an important homeostatic function,
and its disturbance — particularly hypothermia — is common and consequential in
anaesthesia, so an understanding beginning with heat balance is worth setting out.
The body maintains its core temperature within a narrow range around thirty-seven
degrees Celsius, because the body's functions — the enzymes and metabolic processes
— work properly only within a narrow temperature range;
both a fall and a rise in core temperature impair function and, if extreme,
are dangerous.
It is useful to distinguish the core temperature — of the vital deep organs,
which is regulated and kept constant — from the peripheral temperature,
of the skin and limbs, which varies. The core temperature is determined by the
balance between heat gained and heat lost.
Heat is gained chiefly from the body's own metabolism — the heat produced as a
by-product of the metabolic processes,
increased by activity and by shivering — and can be gained from the environment if
it is hotter than the body.
Heat is lost to the environment, when it is cooler, by the physical routes:
radiation, the emission of heat; convection, the carrying-away of heat by air;
conduction, to objects in contact; and evaporation,
of water from the skin and respiratory tract, which carries away heat.
Temperature is regulated by adjusting this balance.
So the body maintains a constant core temperature, around thirty-seven degrees,
because its functions require it; the core temperature, of the deep organs,
being regulated, distinct from the variable peripheral;
determined by the balance of heat gain — chiefly from metabolism — and heat loss to
the environment by radiation, convection,
conduction and evaporation — a balance the body regulates,
and which is disturbed in anaesthesia.
Describe the physiological control of body temperature.
The body controls its core temperature by a regulatory system that senses the
temperature and adjusts heat production and loss,
and an understanding of this control is the basis for understanding its disturbance
in anaesthesia, so it is worth describing.
The control of temperature is a classic homeostatic, negative-feedback system,
coordinated by a control centre in the hypothalamus,
which acts as the body's thermostat. The system has the usual components.
The temperature is sensed by thermoreceptors — both in the skin,
sensing the environmental temperature, and centrally, in the hypothalamus and core,
sensing the core temperature.
This information is integrated by the hypothalamus,
which compares the core temperature against a set point, the desired temperature.
If the temperature deviates, the hypothalamus activates responses to correct it.
If the body is too cold, it activates heat-conserving and heat-generating
responses: vasoconstriction of the skin vessels, reducing heat loss; shivering,
the involuntary muscle activity that generates heat; and, over time,
other mechanisms; together with behavioural responses.
If the body is too hot, it activates heat-losing responses:
vasodilatation of the skin vessels, increasing heat loss; and sweating,
the evaporation of which cools the body; with behavioural responses.
So the hypothalamus holds the core temperature at its set point by balancing these
responses.
This system is important to anaesthesia because anaesthesia impairs it:
anaesthetic drugs depress the hypothalamic regulation and the responses,
widening the range over which the body tolerates temperature change before
responding, so that the patient cannot defend the temperature normally.
So body temperature is controlled by a negative-feedback system centred on the
hypothalamus: thermoreceptors in the skin and core sensing the temperature,
the hypothalamus comparing it against a set point and, if too cold,
activating vasoconstriction and shivering, and if too hot,
vasodilatation and sweating; a system impaired by anaesthesia,
which depresses the regulation and widens the tolerated range — the basis of the
temperature disturbances of anaesthesia.
Describe the causes and mechanisms of perioperative hypothermia.
Hypothermia is a common and important complication of anaesthesia and surgery,
arising from a combination of impaired regulation and increased heat loss,
and an understanding of its mechanisms is of direct practical importance,
so it is worth describing.
Perioperative hypothermia — a fall in the core temperature below the normal range —
is common in the anaesthetised surgical patient,
and arises from two combined effects:
anaesthesia impairs the body's defence of its temperature,
while the environment and the surgery increase heat loss.
Anaesthesia impairs the regulation:
the anaesthetic drugs depress the hypothalamic control,
widening the range over which the body tolerates cooling before it responds,
and impair the responses — the vasoconstriction and shivering — so the patient
cannot defend the temperature; and regional anaesthesia impairs it too,
blocking the vasoconstriction and sensation in the blocked region.
Meanwhile, heat loss is increased: the patient is exposed in a cool operating
theatre, losing heat by radiation and convection;
the skin is exposed and prepared with cold fluids; the body cavities may be open;
cold intravenous and irrigation fluids are given;
and the dry anaesthetic gases cause some loss.
A characteristic pattern occurs: an initial rapid fall in core temperature,
due to the anaesthesia-induced vasodilatation redistributing heat from the warm
core to the cooler periphery; then a slower fall as heat loss exceeds production;
and eventually a plateau.
So the patient becomes hypothermic unless actively kept warm.
So perioperative hypothermia is common,
arising from anaesthesia impairing the body's temperature defence — depressing the
hypothalamic control and the vasoconstriction and shivering responses — combined
with increased heat loss to the cool theatre, from the exposed and prepared skin,
open cavities, and cold fluids; with a characteristic initial rapid fall from the
redistribution of heat to the periphery,
then a slower fall — a mechanism of direct practical importance.
Describe the consequences of perioperative hypothermia and the methods of
preventing it.
Perioperative hypothermia, though often regarded as minor,
has a number of significant adverse consequences,
and its prevention is an important part of anaesthetic care,
so the consequences and the preventive measures are worth drawing together.
The consequences of even mild hypothermia are several and significant.
It increases the risk of surgical wound infection,
by impairing the immune response and the wound blood flow.
It impairs coagulation, increasing blood loss and the need for transfusion.
It causes patient discomfort, and, on waking, shivering,
which is distressing and greatly increases the oxygen consumption,
a strain on the patient with limited cardiac or respiratory reserve.
It increases the cardiovascular stress,
with an association with adverse cardiac events.
It slows the metabolism of drugs, prolonging their effects,
including the neuromuscular blockers. And it prolongs recovery.
So hypothermia is to be prevented.
The prevention rests on minimising heat loss and actively warming the patient.
The measures include: maintaining a warm theatre environment;
minimising the exposure of the patient;
actively warming the patient — chiefly with forced-air warming blankets,
which are the mainstay, blowing warm air over the patient;
warming the intravenous and irrigation fluids;
and monitoring the temperature throughout, so that warming can be guided.
Warming is often begun before induction, to reduce the initial redistribution fall.
So perioperative hypothermia has significant consequences — increased wound
infection, impaired coagulation with greater blood loss,
shivering with increased oxygen consumption, cardiovascular stress,
prolonged drug effects, and delayed recovery;
prevented by minimising heat loss — a warm theatre, minimal exposure,
warmed fluids — and active warming, chiefly with forced-air warming,
with temperature monitoring throughout,
and pre-warming to reduce the redistribution fall — an important part of
anaesthetic care.
Describe malignant hyperthermia.
Malignant hyperthermia is a rare but life-threatening disorder of temperature and
muscle metabolism, triggered by anaesthetic agents,
of critical anaesthetic importance, so it is worth describing.
Malignant hyperthermia is an inherited disorder of skeletal muscle,
in which exposure to certain anaesthetic agents — the trigger agents,
namely the volatile anaesthetics and the depolarising muscle relaxant suxamethonium
— triggers a catastrophic, uncontrolled increase in muscle metabolism.
The underlying defect is in the control of calcium within the muscle cell:
the trigger agents cause an uncontrolled release of calcium within the muscle,
leading to a sustained, intense muscle activity and metabolism.
The consequences are a hypermetabolic crisis:
a greatly increased oxygen consumption and carbon dioxide production — an early and
key sign being a rapidly rising end-tidal carbon dioxide — with a metabolic and
respiratory acidosis; muscle rigidity; a rapidly rising body temperature,
the hyperthermia, though this is often a later sign; a tachycardia and arrhythmias;
and, from the muscle damage, the release of potassium and muscle contents,
causing hyperkalaemia and the breakdown product that damages the kidneys.
It is rapidly fatal if untreated.
The management is urgent: stopping the trigger agents;
giving the specific antidote, dantrolene,
which acts on the muscle to stop the calcium release;
and supportive treatment — cooling, treating the acidosis,
the hyperkalaemia and the arrhythmias, and supporting the organs.
Susceptible patients are identified and managed with a technique avoiding the
trigger agents.
So malignant hyperthermia is an inherited disorder of muscle calcium control in
which trigger agents — the volatiles and suxamethonium — cause an uncontrolled
muscle calcium release and a hypermetabolic crisis:
a rising end-tidal carbon dioxide, acidosis, rigidity, rising temperature,
arrhythmias, and hyperkalaemia with muscle breakdown; rapidly fatal if untreated,
managed urgently by stopping the triggers, giving dantrolene,
and supportive cooling and correction — a critical anaesthetic emergency,
avoided in the susceptible by a trigger-free technique.
Describe the special considerations of thermoregulation at the extremes of age.
Thermoregulation is less effective at the extremes of age — in the neonate and the
elderly — making them particularly vulnerable to perioperative hypothermia,
and an understanding of why is worth having, so it is worth describing.
Both the very young and the old have an impaired ability to regulate their
temperature and a greater tendency to lose heat,
making them especially prone to hypothermia.
The neonate and infant are particularly vulnerable for several reasons:
they have a large surface area relative to their body mass,
so they lose heat rapidly; they have little insulating fat;
their temperature-regulating mechanisms are immature;
and they cannot shiver effectively,
relying instead on a special heat-generating tissue, brown fat, which is limited.
So they cool quickly and have limited means to defend their temperature,
and require great attention to warming.
The elderly also have impaired thermoregulation:
their temperature-regulating responses are blunted — a reduced ability to
vasoconstrict, shiver and sense temperature — and they have a lower metabolic rate
and heat production, often with less muscle and fat;
so they too cool more readily and defend their temperature less well,
compounded by the impairments of anaesthesia and any illness.
Both groups therefore require particular attention to maintaining their temperature
in the perioperative period.
So thermoregulation is impaired at the extremes of age:
the neonate and infant vulnerable through a large surface-area-to-mass ratio,
little insulating fat, immature regulation, and an inability to shiver,
relying on limited brown fat; and the elderly through blunted vasoconstriction,
shivering and sensation and a lower heat production;
both groups cooling readily and defending their temperature poorly,
requiring particular attention to warming — considerations of practical importance.
Pull it together: how does the body regulate its temperature,
and why does it matter to anaesthesia?
I would draw thermoregulation together around the maintenance of a constant core
temperature by a hypothalamic feedback system,
and the importance to anaesthesia of the fact that this system is impaired by
anaesthesia, making temperature disturbance common and consequential.
The body maintains its core temperature constant, around thirty-seven degrees,
because its functions require it; this is achieved by balancing heat production —
chiefly from metabolism — against heat loss to the environment.
The balance is regulated by a hypothalamic feedback system:
thermoreceptors sense the temperature,
the hypothalamus compares it against a set point,
and it activates responses — vasoconstriction and shivering when cold,
vasodilatation and sweating when hot — to defend the temperature.
The relevance to anaesthesia is considerable.
Anaesthesia impairs this regulation — depressing the hypothalamic control and the
defensive responses — while surgery increases heat loss,
so that perioperative hypothermia is common, with its initial redistribution fall;
and hypothermia has significant consequences — wound infection,
impaired coagulation, shivering, cardiovascular stress and prolonged drug effects —
so its prevention, by active warming, is an important part of care.
The extremes of age are especially vulnerable.
And the system's relevance includes the rare but lethal malignant hyperthermia,
a hypermetabolic crisis triggered by anaesthetic agents.
So the body regulates its temperature by a hypothalamic feedback system balancing
metabolic heat production against environmental loss,
defending a constant core temperature by vasoconstriction and shivering or
vasodilatation and sweating; mattering to anaesthesia because this regulation is
impaired by anaesthesia while surgery increases heat loss,
making hypothermia common and consequential — requiring active warming — with the
very young and old especially vulnerable, and with the lethal,
anaesthetic-triggered malignant hyperthermia as a critical concern —
thermoregulation, of central anaesthetic importance.
How and where do we measure core temperature, and why does the site matter?
Core temperature is the temperature of the vital organs of the trunk and head,
normally held close to thirty-seven degrees Celsius with a narrow diurnal variation
of a few tenths of a degree, lowest in the early morning.
It is distinct from the peripheral, or shell, temperature of skin and limbs,
which is several degrees cooler and far more variable.
We measure core temperature at sites that reflect that central compartment:
the pulmonary artery is the gold standard but invasive; the distal oesophagus,
behind the heart, is reliable under anaesthesia;
the nasopharynx approximates brain temperature; the tympanic membrane,
by a contact probe, reflects hypothalamic temperature;
and the bladder and rectum are convenient but lag during rapid change.
Skin and axillary readings underestimate core and are unreliable intraoperatively.
Site matters because the core-to-peripheral gradient is itself the variable of
interest: redistribution of heat from core to periphery,
not loss to the environment, causes the early fall in temperature under
anaesthesia, so monitoring a true core site is essential to detect it.
The AAGBI and NICE recommend measuring temperature for any anaesthetic longer than
thirty minutes. So we choose a validated core site,
recognise that peripheral sites mislead,
and remember that the gradient between the two compartments drives the
perioperative story.
Describe how heat is lost from the body and the relative importance of each route
in theatre.
Heat is exchanged with the environment by four physical mechanisms.
Radiation, the emission of infrared energy to cooler surrounding surfaces,
is the largest route, accounting for about forty per cent of loss in the cool,
exposed conditions of an operating theatre.
Convection, the carrying away of heat by air movement over the skin,
contributes around thirty per cent and rises with the laminar-flow ventilation of
modern theatres.
Conduction, direct transfer to cooler objects in contact such as the operating
table and unwarmed fluids, is usually small but increases with wet drapes and cold
irrigation.
Evaporation, the latent heat carried off as water vaporises from skin,
the respiratory tract and exposed surgical surfaces such as open body cavities,
accounts for the remainder and can be substantial during long laparotomies.
The balance shifts with circumstances:
a large open abdomen greatly increases evaporative and radiant loss,
while cold intravenous and irrigation fluids add conductive loss.
Understanding the partition guides prevention — covering and warming the patient
attacks radiation and convection, warming fluids attacks conduction,
and humidification reduces respiratory evaporative loss.
So radiation and convection dominate in the typical theatre,
and our warming strategies are designed around them.
Outline the hypothalamic control system that regulates body temperature.
Thermoregulation is a classic negative-feedback control system with the set-point
in the preoptic area of the anterior hypothalamus.
Afferent information arrives from peripheral thermoreceptors in the skin — cold
receptors are more numerous and signal through A-delta fibres,
warm receptors through C fibres — and from central receptors in the hypothalamus,
spinal cord and viscera that sense core blood temperature;
recently these have been linked to specific TRP-channel families.
The hypothalamus compares the integrated input against the set-point and,
when temperature strays beyond narrow thresholds,
drives effector responses through autonomic and somatic pathways.
Against cold it produces cutaneous vasoconstriction to conserve core heat,
then non-shivering thermogenesis, important in the neonate, and shivering,
a powerful involuntary muscular heat source; behaviourally it drives seeking warmth.
Against heat it produces cutaneous vasodilatation and sweating,
with its evaporative cooling. The interthreshold range,
within which no response occurs, is normally only a few tenths of a degree,
reflecting tight control.
Anaesthesia widens this range tenfold, abolishing fine regulation.
So the hypothalamus acts as a thermostat comparing multi-source input to a
set-point and recruiting graded autonomic and somatic effectors,
and anaesthesia's central effect is to loosen that comparison.
Walk me through the characteristic pattern of intraoperative hypothermia under
general anaesthesia.
Hypothermia under general anaesthesia follows a stereotyped triphasic course.
The first phase is a rapid fall of around one to one and a half degrees in the
first hour, caused not by net heat loss but by internal redistribution:
anaesthetic-induced vasodilatation opens the cutaneous circulation and warm core
blood flows to the cooler periphery, equalising the gradient.
Because this is redistribution, it is hard to prevent once it begins,
which is why prewarming the periphery before induction is so effective — it narrows
the gradient so there is less heat to move.
The second phase is a slower, roughly linear decline over the next two to three
hours, when metabolic heat production, depressed by anaesthesia,
is exceeded by continuing losses to the environment.
The third phase is a plateau, reached typically around thirty-four to thirty-five
degrees, when the now-cold periphery triggers vasoconstriction even in the
anaesthetised patient, re-establishing a core compartment and balancing heat
production against loss.
Neuraxial anaesthesia produces a similar redistribution but blunts the protective
vasoconstriction below the block, so the plateau may not appear.
So the pattern is redistribution, then linear loss,
then a vasoconstriction plateau, and the dominance of the redistribution phase
explains why prewarming matters more than any single intraoperative measure.
Why does perioperative hypothermia matter? Detail its consequences.
Even mild hypothermia, a core temperature one to two degrees below normal,
has been shown in trials to cause real harm across several systems.
It impairs coagulation — cold slows the enzymatic clotting cascade and platelet
function — increasing blood loss and transfusion requirement.
It triples the risk of surgical wound infection,
both by impairing neutrophil oxidative killing and by cutaneous vasoconstriction
reducing tissue oxygen tension, and it slows wound healing.
It causes adverse cardiac events: postoperative shivering and cold stress trigger
sympathetic activation, tachycardia,
hypertension and a rise in myocardial oxygen demand,
with more ischaemia and arrhythmia in at-risk patients.
It alters pharmacology, slowing the metabolism of most anaesthetic drugs and
prolonging the action of muscle relaxants, delaying recovery.
Postoperative shivering itself raises oxygen consumption several-fold,
is distressing, and stresses the cardiovascular and respiratory systems.
Patient comfort and the subjective sense of cold are also genuinely worsened.
Because the harms are demonstrable and the prevention is cheap and effective,
maintaining normothermia is a recognised quality standard.
So mild hypothermia is not benign — it bleeds, infects, stresses the heart,
lingers in the drugs, and distresses the patient — which is precisely why we
measure and actively prevent it.
What active and passive measures are used to maintain normothermia perioperatively?
Measures divide into passive insulation, active warming,
and minimising added losses, used together.
Passive measures — a single layer of cotton blankets or reflective covering over
exposed skin — reduce radiant and convective loss by perhaps thirty per cent and
are a baseline, but cannot replace lost heat. Active warming is the mainstay.
Forced-air warming blankets, blowing warmed air over a large skin area,
are the most widely used and effective method and counteract redistribution and
ongoing loss. Conductive systems such as warm-water mattresses and resistive
heating pads are alternatives.
Crucially, intravenous fluids and blood should be warmed when volumes are
significant, because a litre of fluid at room temperature measurably cools the
patient, and irrigation fluids likewise.
Prewarming the patient for twenty to thirty minutes before induction is the single
most effective intervention against the redistribution phase,
because it raises peripheral temperature and shrinks the core-to-periphery gradient.
The NICE guidance recommends maintaining a temperature above thirty-six degrees,
measuring it, and prewarming. Humidification and heat-and-moisture exchangers
reduce respiratory loss.
So we insulate, we actively add heat by forced air and warmed fluids,
we prewarm to defeat redistribution,
and we cut avoidable conductive and evaporative losses.
How do anaesthetic agents themselves interfere with thermoregulation?
Anaesthetic agents impair thermoregulation centrally and peripherally,
which is why patients become poikilothermic, drifting towards ambient temperature.
The central effect is a widening of the interthreshold range — the gap between the
cold-response threshold and the warm-response threshold — from its normal few
tenths of a degree to several degrees.
Within this widened range no autonomic defence is mounted,
so temperature falls passively until the much lower vasoconstriction threshold is
finally reached. Volatile agents and propofol both produce this,
in a dose-dependent way, by depressing hypothalamic function.
Opioids lower the vasoconstriction and shivering thresholds and blunt the response.
Peripherally, almost all general anaesthetics cause vasodilatation,
abolishing the tonic vasoconstriction that normally maintains the core compartment,
and this is what permits the early redistribution.
Neuraxial blockade adds a distinct mechanism:
it blocks both the afferent thermal signals from the lower body and the efferent
vasoconstrictor and shivering responses below the block,
while also fooling the hypothalamus into perceiving the warm,
vasodilated lower body as warmer than it is,
so the central response is further blunted — and combined general–regional
anaesthesia is especially hypothermia-prone.
So anaesthetics turn a tightly regulated homeotherm into a near-poikilotherm by
widening central thresholds and abolishing peripheral vasoconstriction.
Tell me about postoperative shivering — its mechanisms and management.
Postoperative shivering occurs in a substantial minority of patients recovering
from anaesthesia and has more than one mechanism.
Most is normal thermoregulatory shivering in response to intraoperative
hypothermia, as the recovering hypothalamus regains control and recruits muscular
heat production.
Some, however, is non-thermoregulatory, occurring in normothermic patients,
and is thought to relate to volatile-agent effects, pain,
and uninhibited spinal reflexes during emergence.
Its consequences are not trivial: shivering can increase oxygen consumption and
carbon dioxide production several-fold,
raising minute ventilation and cardiac demand,
which is hazardous in patients with limited cardiac or respiratory reserve;
it also raises intraocular and intracranial pressure and is distressing and painful
around wounds.
Prevention is best — maintaining intraoperative normothermia greatly reduces it.
For treatment, active warming should continue,
and the most effective drug is intravenous pethidine, also written meperidine,
in a small dose, which acts partly through kappa-opioid and other receptors to
lower the shivering threshold; alternatives include clonidine, tramadol and,
in some practice, ketamine or dexmedetomidine.
Oxygen should be given throughout because of the raised demand.
So shivering is mostly the body's response to having been allowed to cool,
it carries real physiological cost,
and it is best prevented by normothermia and treated with warming and low-dose
pethidine.
Contrast fever, hyperthermia and malignant hyperthermia from the thermoregulatory
standpoint.
These three raised-temperature states differ fundamentally in mechanism,
and the distinction is clinically important.
In fever, the hypothalamic set-point itself is raised by endogenous pyrogens —
cytokines such as interleukin-one and -six and tumour necrosis factor,
acting through prostaglandin E-two — usually in response to infection.
The thermoregulatory machinery is intact; it simply now defends a higher target,
so the patient feels cold, vasoconstricts and shivers to reach it,
and antipyretics work by lowering the set-point back.
In hyperthermia, the set-point is normal but the body cannot dissipate heat fast
enough — as in heat stroke, an over-warmed anaesthetised patient,
or thyroid storm — so temperature rises against the thermostat's wishes,
and the treatment is active cooling, not antipyretics.
Malignant hyperthermia is different again:
it is a hypermetabolic crisis of skeletal muscle,
triggered in susceptible individuals by volatile agents or suxamethonium,
due to uncontrolled calcium release through a defective ryanodine receptor.
The heat is a by-product of runaway metabolism,
accompanied by rising carbon dioxide, rigidity, tachycardia,
acidosis and hyperkalaemia; the rise in temperature is a late sign.
Its specific treatment is dantrolene, which blocks the calcium release,
alongside cooling and supportive care. So fever resets the thermostat,
hyperthermia overwhelms it, and malignant hyperthermia bypasses it entirely through
a muscle metabolic catastrophe.
Describe non-shivering thermogenesis and where it is important.
Non-shivering thermogenesis is the production of heat by metabolic means without
muscular contraction, and its principal site is brown adipose tissue.
Brown fat is rich in mitochondria, which give it its colour,
and is found in the neonate around the scapulae, mediastinum, kidneys and adrenals.
Its defining feature is the protein thermogenin,
also called uncoupling protein one, in the inner mitochondrial membrane:
when activated, it uncouples oxidative phosphorylation from ATP synthesis,
so that the energy of substrate oxidation is dissipated directly as heat rather
than captured as ATP.
The stimulus is sympathetic — noradrenaline acting on beta-three receptors —
released in response to cold sensed by the hypothalamus, and the fuel is fatty acid.
This mechanism is vital in the neonate, who has a large surface-area-to-mass ratio,
cannot shiver effectively, and would otherwise be unable to defend temperature;
it is why keeping newborns warm is so critical and why cold stress rapidly depletes
their energy reserves and causes hypoglycaemia and acidosis.
In adults, brown fat was long thought vestigial but is now known to persist and be
metabolically active, though it contributes little to acute defence,
where shivering dominates.
So non-shivering thermogenesis is heat from uncoupled mitochondrial respiration in
brown fat, indispensable to the newborn and a reason neonatal warming is a priority.
How does the body respond to a hot environment to lose heat?
When core temperature rises or a hot environment is sensed,
the hypothalamus mounts heat-losing responses, the mirror of the cold defences.
The first is cutaneous vasodilatation: active dilatation of skin arterioles,
partly through withdrawal of sympathetic vasoconstrictor tone and partly through an
active sympathetic vasodilator and bradykinin mechanism linked to sweating,
can raise skin blood flow enormously,
bringing warm core blood to the surface to lose heat by radiation and convection.
The second, and the only effective defence once ambient temperature approaches or
exceeds skin temperature, is sweating: eccrine glands,
driven by sympathetic cholinergic fibres — an unusual combination — secrete a
hypotonic fluid whose evaporation removes latent heat,
about two and a half thousand kilojoules per litre.
A fit acclimatised person can sweat over a litre an hour,
but at the cost of water and salt, so dehydration and hyponatraemia limit it.
Acclimatisation increases the sweat rate and lowers its salt content.
Behavioural responses — removing clothing, seeking shade,
reducing activity — supplement these. When these mechanisms are overwhelmed or
fail, as in heat stroke, core temperature climbs uncontrollably with cellular
injury.
So the body sheds heat chiefly by vasodilatation and evaporative sweating,
the latter being the sole route once the environment is hotter than the skin.
Finally, how does neuraxial anaesthesia specifically affect temperature,
and how does that alter your vigilance?
Neuraxial anaesthesia — spinal or epidural — causes hypothermia by mechanisms that
are partly shared with and partly distinct from general anaesthesia,
and it is often underestimated because the patient is awake.
The sympathetic block below the level produces vasodilatation in the lower body,
allowing the same core-to-peripheral redistribution that drives the early fall
under general anaesthesia.
Critically, the block also prevents the two main cold defences below its level:
it abolishes vasoconstriction and shivering in the blocked segments,
removing the body's ability to conserve and generate heat there.
Furthermore, the block deceives central thermoregulation — the hypothalamus
interprets the warm, vasodilated lower body as evidence of warmth and so raises the
threshold at which it will respond,
blunting the central drive even in the unblocked upper body.
The consequence is that patients under neuraxial block can become significantly
hypothermic without the obvious cue of shivering, and may not feel cold.
The vigilance this demands is to measure temperature during neuraxial anaesthesia
just as under general anaesthesia, to warm actively rather than assume an awake
patient is protected, and to be especially careful in combined general–regional
techniques and in obstetric and elderly patients.
So neuraxial block both promotes heat loss and disables its detection and defence,
and the safe response is to monitor and warm as diligently as for any general
anaesthetic.
Set out the heat balance and the sources of metabolic heat production.
Body temperature is the result of a balance:
the rate of heat stored equals the rate of heat produced minus the rate of heat
lost, and a stable temperature requires production and loss to match.
Heat is produced as the by-product of metabolism.
At rest, the basal metabolic rate generates the baseline,
with the major organs — liver, brain,
heart and kidneys — contributing most despite their small mass,
producing on the order of seventy to eighty watts in an adult at rest.
Several factors add to this.
The specific dynamic action of food,
the thermogenic effect of digesting and assimilating nutrients, especially protein,
adds heat after meals.
Muscular activity is the most powerful and variable source — exercise can raise
heat production more than tenfold, and shivering, involuntary muscle activity,
can multiply resting production several times specifically for thermogenesis.
Non-shivering thermogenesis in brown fat, through mitochondrial uncoupling,
adds heat in the neonate. Hormones modulate the rate:
thyroid hormones set the basal metabolic rate over the long term,
and catecholamines raise it acutely.
Heat is then lost by radiation, convection, conduction and evaporation as discussed.
So temperature stability is a continuous balancing of metabolic production — basal
organ metabolism, the heat of feeding, muscular work and shivering,
all tuned by thyroid and catecholamines — against the four routes of loss.
Where is induced hypothermia used deliberately,
and what is targeted temperature management?
Deliberate, controlled lowering of body temperature exploits the fact that cooling
reduces metabolic rate — oxygen consumption falls by around six to seven per cent
per degree — and so protects tissues against ischaemia.
Its established uses include deep hypothermic circulatory arrest in aortic and
complex cardiac surgery, where cooling to around eighteen degrees allows a period
of circulatory arrest for repair; and historically in some neurosurgery.
The most discussed application is targeted temperature management after cardiac
arrest: in comatose survivors of out-of-hospital arrest,
controlling temperature — current guidance favours maintaining a constant target,
avoiding fever, with trial evidence having moved from a strict thirty-three degrees
towards normothermia targets around thirty-six to thirty-seven and a half degrees
with strict fever avoidance — aims to limit the secondary neuronal injury of
reperfusion.
Therapeutic cooling has costs that must be managed: shivering,
which must be suppressed to realise the metabolic benefit; arrhythmia;
coagulopathy; impaired immunity and infection;
a cold diuresis with electrolyte loss; and altered drug clearance.
Rewarming must be slow and controlled to avoid rebound hyperkalaemia and
vasodilatation.
So induced hypothermia is metabolic protection used in circulatory arrest surgery
and, as carefully controlled temperature management, after cardiac arrest,
always balanced against the real physiological costs of being cold.
Why are the elderly particularly vulnerable to thermoregulatory disturbance?
The elderly defend their body temperature poorly at both ends,
and this matters greatly in the perioperative period.
Their vulnerability is multifactorial.
The basal metabolic rate falls with age,
so there is less continuous metabolic heat production,
and reduced muscle mass means a weaker shivering response.
Both the perception of temperature and the central thermoregulatory thresholds are
blunted, so the response to cold or heat is mounted later and less vigorously;
the interthreshold range is wider even before anaesthesia.
The cutaneous vasoconstrictor and vasodilator responses are impaired by stiffer,
less reactive vessels, reducing both heat conservation and heat dissipation.
Sweating is diminished.
Reduced subcutaneous fat lowers passive insulation,
and behavioural and mobility limitations reduce the capacity to seek warmth or
shade. On top of this, many take medicines that further impair thermoregulation.
The consequences are that elderly surgical patients become hypothermic more readily
and more deeply, are slower to rewarm,
and tolerate the cardiovascular stress of hypothermia and shivering less well,
while in hot conditions they are prone to heat illness.
The practical response is heightened vigilance: measure temperature, prewarm,
and warm actively and early, recognising that the margin for thermoregulatory
compensation is small.
So ageing erodes every limb of thermoregulation — production, sensing,
central response and effector function — making active perioperative warming all
the more important.
Thank you. An excellent and complete account. Let us stop there.
Before we close, here are the take-home messages.
First, The body holds core temperature ~37°C (functions/enzymes require it).
Core (regulated, deep organs) is distinct from peripheral (variable).
Core temperature = balance of heat gain (chiefly metabolism) vs heat loss to
environment by radiation, convection, conduction and evaporation.
Second, Control = hypothalamic negative-feedback thermostat:
skin + core thermoreceptors → hypothalamus compares against a set point → if cold,
vasoconstriction + shivering (+ behaviour); if hot, vasodilatation + sweating.
Anaesthesia depresses this regulation and widens the tolerated (inter-threshold)
range, so the patient cannot defend temperature normally.
Third, Perioperative hypothermia is common:
anaesthesia impairs temperature defence + surgery/environment increase heat loss
(cool theatre, exposed/prepped skin, open cavities, cold fluids).
Characteristic pattern: rapid initial fall from anaesthesia-induced vasodilatation
redistributing core heat to the periphery, then a slower fall, then plateau. 4.
Consequences of hypothermia: ↑ wound infection,
impaired coagulation (↑ blood loss), shivering (↑ O2 consumption),
cardiovascular stress, slowed drug metabolism (prolonged effects), delayed recovery.
Prevention: warm theatre, minimal exposure, warmed IV/irrigation fluids,
active forced-air warming (mainstay), temperature monitoring,
and pre-warming to blunt the redistribution fall.
Fourth, Malignant hyperthermia: inherited disorder of muscle calcium control;
trigger agents (volatile anaesthetics + suxamethonium) cause uncontrolled muscle
Ca² release → hypermetabolic crisis — rising end-tidal CO2 (early key sign),
acidosis, rigidity, rising temperature, arrhythmias,
hyperkalaemia + muscle breakdown.
Treat urgently: stop triggers, give dantrolene, supportive cooling/correction;
avoid triggers in the susceptible.
Thermoregulation is impaired at the extremes of age (neonate:
high surface-area-to-mass, little fat, can't shiver — brown fat; elderly:
blunted responses, low heat production).
Thank you. That concludes the station.